BE PREPARED for the WOODS


Nobody expects to get lost and yet it happens frequently.


It pays to invest in good equipment.


on a whistle or three shouts are recognized as a distress call.


Never swim alone.


Avoid wild animals that come too near or that seem too friendly.


The best way to avoid a confrontation is by taking these basic precautions:  


never store food in your tent (some parks have bear-resistant food storage
facilities)

do not cook or eat in or near your tent

do not sleep in clothes worn while cooking as clothing absorbs food odours

store and carry food (and garbage) in airtight containers.  Do not bury

become a danger to the next group of hikers.  

hang food-packs (and your toothpaste) from a tree out of reach of bears and
other animals, and away from your immediate camping area

never feed a bear

stay away from a mother and her cubs

make noise when you walk in the bush to advertise your presence

avoid scented cosmetics -- bears may be attracted to perfumes, hair sprays
and soaps. 

Women should be extra careful during menstruation to take steps to eliminate
odours, particularly from used materials by storing in an airtight container.



and slowly back away avoiding abrupt movements and eye contact.

If a black bear attacks, fight it off with any weapon you can lay your
hands on, even if all you can do is kick or punch the bear.  Don't play
dead -- this doesn't work with black bears!

However, if a grizzly bear attacks, play dead.  The recommended


survival rules.


guard against the effects of hypothermia


survival.


body fluids. Both increase your susceptibility to hypothermia.


Unless you can meet all the following conditions, don't try and walk to
safety:


	know approximately where you are and where you want to go
	have a means of maintaining and setting direction
	have clothing that will stand up to any type of weather conditions you may
	run into
	have sufficient food, fuel and shelter that you can carry with you.



library for books on wilderness survival.



don't exhaust yourself by building an elaborate shelter.)


contribute to hypothermia. 


suggested items that could be included in a basic survival/first-aid kit:

	matches in a waterproof container
	plastic food bags
	orange or yellow plastic garbage bag
	high-energy snack
	whistle (pealess whistles are best)
	pocket knife
	compass (make sure you know how to use it)
	lightweight space blanket
	reflector or hand mirror (for signalling)
	insect repellent
	tube of antibiotic ointment
	plastic bandage strips



For suggestions on what to include, check books on wilderness survival). 


panic and keep the child in one place, increasing chances of discovery.


frighten it away.  This will also help searchers find them.


down in a clearing wearing a brightly coloured garbage bag or jacket.


afraid of being punished.


SAFE GUARD


aimed at  increasing public awareness of emergency preparedness in Canada


community.


The amber  yellow colour is a sign of caution and warning.


 





