

RESTING A LOT HELP A LOT:

In Survival situation, taking it easy is the best policy.
Stopping frequently to catch your breath even sitting down for a
minute or 2 no more is enough to carry you on for a long time. 

The key is to stop frequently when you do heavy exercises for
example carrying heavy burdens. Set yourself short goals to
reach, then stop and start over again.

The folly of forced march can not be over emphasise. Don't do
them unless the dearest emergency. For it you meet troubles or
expect troubles you should meet it fresh. Tired men make mistakes
of judgement and timing. Weary bodies fall easy prey to the
parasitic infections of the wild valleys.

THIRST & MARCHING ON:

When walking on a long stretch beside resting a lot, one should
be careful of his drinking habit, as you walk rinse your mouth
with water then spit the residue out, it is another lesson in the
syllabus of survival. A tired man can not march with liquid slopping
around in his stomach.

PLASTIC ROPE TRICK:

Plastic rope can be used for shoes laces, insuring you to have at
all times a rope for many usage, tying up whatever you want, from
hooks to bones to tent etc., as fishing line or as snares etc.
Beside burning and giving a high heat, the rope does not rot and
it can be unravelled to make longer rope as need comes along.

So MAKE SURE you have it with you, in your survival kit and
specially replacing your normal hiking boot laces, use a yellow
colour one so that it can also be used as markers on a trail. 

BASIC SHELTER REQUIREMENTS:

They are relatively easy to build if one has just a little
knowledge of their construction. All of them are made from
usually abundant materials at hand.

Dead branches and saplings are employed to make the frames,
shorter sticks and branches form the roof latticework and wet
leaves, snow, ferns, or just plain dirt can be used to seal out
the elements. As with all other  aspects of survival, "image-in-nation" 
and ingenuity are the keys to success.

COLD NOTES ADDITION NOT ADDICKTION:

COLD WEATHER IS UNDOUBTEDLY THE MOST COMMON LIFE THREATENING
CONDITION ANYONE IN A SURVIVAL SITUATION WILL FACE. 

WIND & FREEZING TEMPERATURES HAVE CAUSE THE DEATHS OF MORE
WOODSMEN THAN ALL OTHER FACTORS COMBINED:

PRIMARILY BECAUSE THE AVERAGE OUTDOOR RECREATIONIST IS UNPREPARED
TO WEATHER A WINTER STORM.

NEARLY ALL COLD WEATHER FATALITIES OCCUR AMONG SPORT HUNTERS: 

A group  form whom taking to wilderness without proper clothing,
preparation, or training is almost traditional...

In a study conducted by the NRA in 1978 it was determined that
the person least like to survive in extended stay in the
wilderness was the armed sport hunter.

Wet, rainy weather can be every bit as dangerous as freezing
weather, even though temperatures may be well above freezing. 

A cold downpour on a sixty degree day will literally wash away
its victim's body heat, leaving him wet, cold and ill prepared
for the sudden drop in temperature that's SURE to come after the
sun sets.

Most experienced woodsmen agree that the BEST CLOTHING FOR
RETAINING BODY HEAT IN WET WEATHER IS MADE FROM WOOL.

Goretex helps to keep you dry. Thinsulate will keep you warm when
you are dry, but ONLY WOOL will keep you warm when you are soaking wet.

Snow in and of itself is probably the LEAST THREATENING weather
condition. In fact a 20 degree day with snow on the ground will
seem noticeably warmer than the same day without snow.  

The same insulating qualities that make a snow filled forest so
quiet will also make it feel warmer.

Snow can actually be used to protect oneself against the dangers
of cold weather, because it is abundant, easy to work with and
entirely effective for manufacturing windproof walls and roofs.

The MOST SERIOUS DANGER from the snow it its BRIGHTNESS, which
causes a debilitating -if temporary- affliction known as "snow
blindness" especially in bright sunlight.

Snow blindness should ALWAYS BE GUARDED AGAINST BY WEARING
SUNGLASSES or a brimmed hat to shade the eyes. If neither is
available, fashion emergency goggles by tying around your head a
broad strip of Birch bark with narrow slits cut into it.

On the other side, the sun can be as dangerous as any other
weather condition. Prolonged exposure to a hot sun can cause
dehydration, heat exhaustion and finally heat stroke.

Just as hot is the opposite of cold, so are the requirements of a
hot weather shelter the opposite of the cold weather shelter.
Where the cold weather shelter needs dead air to retain the
user's body heat, the hot weather shelter needs to breather and
have as much air circulation as possible. 

HOT SHELTERS:

An effective hot weather shelter can be made simply by erecting a
sloped light-proof roof over a frame, leaving the sides, front
and back open to allow any air currents to pass unobstructed. The
space blanket works very well here.

The roof should face south to keep out as much sun as possible,
and travelling through open country MUST be restricted to the
hours between dusk and dawn.

The shade provided by the roof will be approximately 10 degrees
cooler than the outside temperature and should be comfortable
enough to allow the survivalist to sleep throughout the heat of
the day. Perspiration wastes water.

COLD SHELTERS:

A thick, insulating bed is ABSOLUTELY VITAL IN COLD WEATHER and
is even a good idea on a summer night. The earth is the world's
best heat sink and it will absorb a human's body heat faster than
it can be generated, resulting in hypothermia that can range from
mild to life threatening.

WINTER BEDS:

They need not to be fancy or difficult to make. My own favourite
winter bed is made from lengths of dead poplar or cottonwood
logs. When these short-lived softwoods die the tops break off in
the wind, leaving sections of the trunk sticking above the winter
hard-pack.

These dead trunks are easy to break off and several of them laid
side by side on the snow with a thick covering of pine boughs
will provide as much insulation from the ground as possible. 


STENCH OFF:

To get rid of foul odour an old trick was to burn sugar on a
burning charcoal or other appropriate means.

SURVIVAL VEST 2001:

Rough riders in  Calgary stampede shows are now more and more
wearing a new protection vest against horses and bull kicks which
has proven itself as extremely effective, the thing to remember
is that it must be done in conjunction with an under padding made
of foam same type we see for sleeping bush mattress. ***** To
investigate further.

But the combination of both does the trick and you can get in
tough situation with hardly a bruise but to your pride.

HUNTING TRICK TO HEAR AFAR:

Many years ago our Indian forefathers had a method of listening
to sound which the naked ear could not pick up. They scraped a
hollow into the ground then cupped their ear to the ground.

They heard the soundless movements of animals and miles away they
heard the restlessness of the buffalo and the distant hoof-beats
of a rider.
