                    WARNING! WARNING! WARNING!

THE FOLLOWING FILE IS NOT TERMINATED BUT SOON WILL BE DONE ASAP
IN HYPERTEXT AND WITH PIX WHEN NEED BE SO PLEASE BARE WITH ME
TILL  THEN,  MUCH  INFORMATION CAN BE  USED  MEANWHILE  FOR  YOUR
ENJOYEMENT OR PLEASURE. MEANWHILE IF YOU HAVE ANY TIPS FOR ME
SEND THEM UP BY E-MAIL TO: richard@io.org


TEST FILES EXERCISES & EVALUATIONS & TRACKING METHOD:

TRACKING TEST:

You have to learn to track a man or beast on all terrain and
conditions by loads of practices.

For ex. The fire ashes are very instructive, are they warm or
cold, by checking the left over you will be able to tell what
someone ate and their abundance or not. Once a good tracker has
found fresh tracks he will generally avoid to follow it step by
step since a tracked animal or man usually looks behind to see if
he is followed.

The hunter advance by 1/2 circles and if he finds the track where
he thinks it will be then he makes a longer 1/2 circle until he
finds nothing. Then he knows he has overridden its prey which he
then proceeds in targeting by using smaller circles till he
reaches the prey.

ALWAYS CHECKING THE WIND, WHICH MAY GIVE YOU AWAY:

ADVISES ON TRACKING:

In places where the tracks appear difficult to read for ex on
hard ground, or grass, note the direction of the last visible
foot steps then look in the same direction they seem to lean to
further ahead about 15-25 meters.

You will usually note the grass being trampled or broken, and on
hard ground some stones having been moved or scratched. Those
small signs seen on the same direction line will give a good
bearing of the direction taken, which you would not have seen by
any other way. Project ahead what you think the prey has done
from the last visible tracks.

It is also very important to put yourself #a contre jour# when
tracking a difficult trail, then the smallest terrain depression
project their shadow.

TRACKING TRICKS # 2:

1)   Study the imprint carefully, fix all details in your mind
and if need be write them down, sketch it, measure it, not only
the step but the distance between them as well. So that if you
run into other tracks that cross yours, you still find it back.

2)   Look your track # a contre jour.# If the sun shines on the
track the outline #contour# of each one will come out a bit
shady.

If your turn your back to the sun, these shadows will become
invisible but if you place yourself in front of the sun these
shadows will be clearly outlined.

Even if the track forces you to follow it with the sun in the
back, you just turn around from time to time to see the track
with the help of the sun.

3)   Take a scenery sight. You MUST not follow a track like a dog
your nose in the ground, look ahead and see the trail and where
it is leading to. 

DON'T EVER WALK ON THE TRAIL, BUT ALWAYS ON THE SIDE.

You can follow a track even when you don't see footprint, for ex.
In the grass the whole of the track will be marked clearly
because the trampled grass reflects the sun differently and
appears of a different color. Even in the bushes, some leaves
will have been upturned, branches ruffled, twigs broken etc.
 
4)    Put yourself in the shoes of your prey. Ask yourself, if
you had to go through here, in those conditions, what would I
have done? 

5)    Look in circle. If the trail gets lost, plant a stick, rock
etc. Then make a circle around the last imprint, if no clues,
then make another bigger circle. (See lower item)**

LOST & FINDING BACK A TRACK:

If you are loosing a track here is what to do to find it back.
Place your stick or object beside the last noticeable track then
make a wide circle about 30, 50 even 100 meters from this last
pin point choosing the most favorable terrain which could give
you clues about the next track direction.

If you are in a group patrol then use only one or 2 trackers so
that the others don't foul the tracks with their own steps. Too
many cooks spoil the sauce. Use your common sense??? By asking
yourself what direction has the prey taken then go and check it
out.

Check the ground carefully, as well as the bushes or plants
nearby, to see if they are broken or could even carry some tell
tale hair or piece of cloth, mud etc.

STICK METHOD TRACKING:

Some like to use also the stick method; which is to use the signs
of a good track and regulating exactly your steps to the imprint.
You walk aside of the trail imprint and hit the ground with the
stick where the imprints are made.

When the imprints disappear on hard ground or sand one continues
to hit the ground where the imprints would have been. And from
time to time you will notice some slight #depression# or whatever
marks which will tell you that the prey when that way.

ART OF STAYING UNSEEN: (INVISIBLE MAN!)

If you want to observe wild life you MUST learn how to crawl
close to them without them seeing you nor smell or feel your
presence. A hunter as a military scout on guard or checking the
enemy MUST stay well hidden thus the use of camouflage.

Often also in town he has the habit of stopping in front of store
windows so as to check who is behind him. So once you trail
someone don't stand in front of him but just give occasional
glance to get the general picture.

If you want to know more about the person, stay behind him.
Surprisingly there is as much to learn from behind one than in
front of him unless he also has taken scout's lessons and
frequently looks behind him to see if he is followed.

The right way to look behind you is to turn only your head, the
bad way is to turn all your body, yet few people know this. Think
of walking slowly with a light foot and in silence, to avoid
walking on dead leaves, branches and rocks or whatever could make
noise to crack, listen as well as you see, speed is not the
essence. 

WE REPEAT AGAIN, FREEZE IF YOU THINK YOU ARE SEEN, PLAY DEAD.

STALKING TRICK:

One trick to follow someone if you are alone is to carry a bag in
which you can put different hats, even a wig to change your
shape. Most people fail to notice a man with a shopping bag,
thinking he is one of the local who just comes from shopping. You
can also put a different jacket or sweater or hat to change your
appearance.

Don't forget if you are to stand still for a long time waiting
for someone which you are trailing; to have a tall empty plastic
bottle which is very useful to take a piss unnoticed. If you are
2 to follow a trail then one stand on one side of the street the
other behind the trail.

CAMOUFLAGE:

One also MUST REMEMBER the background, trees or buildings behind
them or in front of them & the color of their clothing. If the
prey looks their way they MAKE SURE to stay absolutely immobile
all the time that the prey looks in their direction.

Hoping that he will see nothing suspicious and often even in wide
open area, someone can often fail to be noticed because he does
not move. The prey can suffer from bad sights or have a cold &
can not smell. So do consider the color of your clothing so as to
blend it to the background.

If you are in khaki don't stand in front of a white wall or a
tree with dark foliage but choose a background with sand or dry
grass or rock and then don't move, even at small distance the
enemy will have a hard time spotting you.

WARNING:

So, BEWARE of your clothing color & the background. So that you
don't stand up like a sore thumb in the scenery. If you wear dark
clothes stick in a dark place or shadow from trees or boulders
MAKING SURE that your background is dark as well.

HIGH HILLS LOOK OUT:

When using hills as observation post MAKE SURE not to override
the horizon line which will make you a sitting duck. Greenhorns
usually do this error and get caught also by moving too fast or a
lot.

When you want to see behind a big stone; don't look over it but
try to see from the side of it, use its shadow to cover you
better. Crawl to the top of the hill, raise your head VERY
SLOWLY!

If you see something then keep on looking without moving your
head, the enemy or prey may confound you for a rock or stump,
especially if you have taken the precaution of using some
camouflage tricks.

CAMOUFLAGE TRICKS:

Like grass and twigs, using a string put some of them up and some
downward, smear some ashes on your face to break the smooth white
pattern. Check for your hands, face (nose, high cheek bones, shin
and ear lobes) and MAKE SURE they are camouflaged, check anything
shiny.

Nothing captures more the attention than regular lines, this is
what you MUST break or alter using what is in the area, just
breaking or altering the lines is sufficient, don't become a
walking bush. Also check your shadow which could betray you. Then
once your observation made, lower your head again very slowly!

Sudden movement will attract attention even from afar. Very
slowly! You MUST make use of all shelters and hide out that the
terrain offers you, small brushes or shrubs, small trench,
shadows etc. The safest road is rarely in straight line. 

AVOID AS DEADLY SUNNY SPOT since the sun makes everything shine
or highlights your moves.

IMMOBILITY:

REMEMBER ONCE MORE THAT IMMOBILITY IS OFTEN THE KEY #1 TO SUCCESS
IN TRACKING.

We notice easily any movement even from the corner of our eyes so
does the prey, instead a scout leaning against a tree close to
the bush can be perfectly invisible if he does not move, but if
he does one sudden move he will be seen. If you have to move, do
it very slowly, very, very slowly. Stay Immobile then move in
slow motion.

SPOCK SPOTTED THEN FREEZE!:

So whatever you do, if your senses reveal you an enemy or prey,
rather than fleeing or to try to hide, just FREEZE on the spot
and whatever position you're in, even one foot or arm in the air;
FREEZE AS STATUE!

NOISELESS:

REMEMBER that the wind carries your odor but also the noise, so
silence is needed, make as little as possible, no rock concert.
When you walk in grass or leaves put slowly and lightly your heel
then your toes. 

When walking on hard or stony ground put your toes first then
lower SLOWLY your heel. In both cases keep your balance with the
foot behind till the forefoot is ready to carry you. Raise your
feet high so as to avoid to hit the stones or break branches.

DISCIPLINE & PROTECTION:

Stalking is also a matter of discipline and the nature of the
terrain and operation will tell you if it is better to walk in
single file, horizontally, arrow-head or in small group. 

The ESSENTIAL is to keep contact and to REMEMBER an easy signal
code which MUST be in total silence using your hand or arm.

In case of halt, assure a circular protection so that if you are
in Indian file, the first man will lay down with its head
straight ahead and the last man checks the rear and the in-
between checking the right and left alternatively 1/2 right/ left
3/4 left/ right. But ALWAYS with an eye on the chief at the
front. This applies all time!

BARE FEET IMPRINT:  

For the beginners all bare feet are equal yet not true for
experts. Here is how the Indian police work, this can also be
used in Egypt of south-Africa where there are a lot of people
going barefoot. Measure the foot track, draw a line from the big
toe to the small toe and note the exact position of the other toe
in so far as that line.

Once you find foot prints compare them with your drawing. All
people differ by the position of their big toes. So if you add
all the information of the size of the foot, its length step and
other characteristics you get a good picture if he was walking
with his foot going inside, outside.

Using his heel and how deeply and you can tell often if the man
was citizen or country folk, tall or small by the length of the
step, heavy or light according to the depth of the track, if he
was running or walking. 

A running man only leaves toe print and usually deeply marked in
the ground. The distance separating the left and right foot
permits to guess the width of the belt or hips thus to determine
his height, size and weight.

CRAWLING TO THE PREY:

Extremely tiring, the way to do this is to practice a sort of
frog like crawl, the body and members flat on the ground and the
head leaning on the cheek. You move forward using one leg and the
arms without lifting elbows or knees, and letting the other leg
dragging watch for your feet which MUST lay flat inside as if
broken.

You also need to rest a lot since it is very tiring but also to
have time to listen well, to see and especially to get back your
nerves. #retablir equilibre nerveux necessaires# . The stomach
and chest MUST skim the ground as much as possible, so the legs
and arms have to work horizontally as much as you can.

The shoulders and hip rotation MUST be kept at minimum and at no
time MUST the hips rise higher than the head. The head will rise
slowly to check quickly the direction and attitude of the prey. 

When there are many who crawl in the same direction, only one is
in charge of the observation which is the chief ahead. Otherwise
this bopping up & down of many heads will kill the operation.
Bebop!

When the tracker or crawler thinks he has been seen, he MUST stay
immobile, (Freeze) for several minutes, without moving at all.
Other noise around could switch the attention of the prey. This
hope is permitted and often works if you FREEZE.

Wild life and scientist have proven that there is such a thing as
Protective Immobilization. Rabbits, bees, partridges etc. do it
all the time if they feel danger. Use all the terrain accidents
to help you, and study carefully the ground ahead, moving away a
stone, spreading without noise some branches, cutting away what
might need be, to cut down noise.

Speed is nothing to the stalker time does not count. 1 meter per
minute is at time a good speed.

FOOT SENSITIVITY:

One note via stalking shoes; when possible use light flexible
moccasin since you can feel the ground & the #tactile sense of
the sole# and toes is easy to awaken. It is learned quickly and
will give tremendous help especially at night.

NOTES:

However we feel that a good training for a stalker can not be
done alone especially in crawling, so use a friend and compete.

REMEMBER when tracking someone that if he or they carry something
heavy their tracks will be deep, and if they carry something very
heavy their trail will be sinuous.

STALKING BY EAR METHOD:

American Indians have an excellent method to listen while
stalking a trail they open their mouth widely. This extend the
eardrum thus permitting to hear better

FLAT GROUND IS DECEIVING:

It is a notion that most who have not tried the experience have
failed to notice which is the absorption faculty of a supposedly
flat terrain. I recall an experience made with a group of 5
patrols. The V.I.P was brought up to an open field by a road know
ahead and at a fixed location where he could believe easily to be
alone with the chief, not a bush in sight.

At the blow of a whistle the 5 patrols appeared in sight, at a
distance so short that they literally appeared coming from the
ground. A few negligible depressions had been enough to hide them
barely and no heads had showed up. An excellent exercise consists
of training with a friend.

You will thus learn that a hollow or cavity hardly visible can
swallow a man laying down totally and subtract it from an
observatory standing at 80 meters, sitting at 40 meters and
laying at 20 meters. Most country lands are # 1 vanishing
partners.

So REMEMBER NEVER to raise your head above a bush or rock, fallen
tree, etc. without first asking this question; 

WHAT IS MY BACKGROUND? 

In short the sky and the sun are 2 main enemies for the stalker.

The first tells of your smallest moves and Chinese shadows. The
second tells your shadow and its spot lights your actions. A dark
cloudy day or with a lot of shadow is the best time.

NATURAL STOOGES BIRDS ETC.:

While stalking beware of the stooges, birds and 4 legs ones. A
blackbird can suddenly fly off its own accord, 2 also although
this is a bit suspicious! But that a Blackbird, a Jay, a Finch
all take off at the same time and from about the same point this
is serious and tells you the danger point where something hides.

Beware of the bushes where you don't hear any bird noise they are
not there because someone is already there to scare them away.
Magpie* fear man and give precious indications. REMEMBER the
enemy or the prey also watches those birds to give them
forewarning. Checking for barking dog is fine but check also for
the BIRDS.

TRUE WAR STORY:

Here is a true wartime experience to prove this important point.
"At about the center of our sector and about 2km behind our
watching line was 2 high towers from an old Abbey. The enemy had
punch many holes in it and we were using it as an artillery
observation post. But as soon as watchers were sent to do their
jobs the shells would rain all around and some time on target.

Whereas soon as the observatory was deserted not one shell would
fall around. Here was a mystery to investigate, and so we did by
interrogating people around yet without any result. Only 3 months
later was the mystery unraveled, from a load of prisoners there
was an artillery feld-webel which was caught and since the
mystery of the Towers was still raging, the question was asked
first gently then with a bit of pressure he finally told us.

It was simple enough, they had the order to check 3 or 4 couple
of crow birds which were living in the mystery towers. When the
birds were resting on #corniches ou les abats-sons# we let them
in peace. But as soon as they would fly around the towers we
would conclude that someone had disturbed them and we would phone
our batteries.

The morning after without fail, the crows were buried RIP and
finally our observers could work in peace for ESSENTIAL data."

STALLING THE STALKER TRICKS:

You can use the stream to wade in for a while and make the
stalker loose your track hopefully! If you are 2 men, the one
behind does the sweeping to hide the track. Pepper on the ground
will get rid of the dogs for a while.

OLD INDIAN DIVERSION TRICK:

Here is an old trick used by Indians who would walk in a single
file not only to stop the blubbering or to protect themselves but
especially to superpose and override their tracks thus preventing
the trackers to evaluate correctly their numbers. When a hundred
pairs of moccasins had trampled a trail of 20cm wide. It was
difficult to know the number of warriors if it was inferior to 30
or superior to 500.

RAISING DUST TRICK:

Much dust raised does not mean there are much of a crowd, if you
want to attract the enemy attention you tie some branches behind
a truck or horse and let it drag! All that dust will imitate a
large troop moving whereas there is only a few. (Israelis used
this trick successfully in 1967 War!)

STALKING CAR AND BIKES TRACKS on SAND:

A bicycle direction can be found when you observe the slight
detour. The most pointed angle indicates the direction. For a car
the dust or the mud form on each sides a series of small waves in
a shape of barbed feathers which indicate the direction taken and
if the car has overrun a stone or a bump it shows a
characteristic flattening.

HARD GROUND TRACKING TIPS:

Hard grounds don't keep tracks but it often happens that the foot
of the walker will remove a small pebble that previous pressure
had half way driven in the ground. Thus you will discover close
by a hole which will mold this stone perfectly, this hole will
also be darker because of humidity. (We talk here of fresh
tracks!)

So have a sharp? eye to mineral fragments, stones etc. small or
big especially if they appear to have been removed. Give some
attention to scraps of wood slightly flatten or bruised, check
the appearance of the ground under it, check the berries or
leaves fallen out of seasons and of which some may reveal to have
been crushed by sole.

When a stone is removed or turned upside down, examine the grass
that it covers and its state might give you some indications of
the time it was done. Young grass will straighten up faster when
green and in abundance but tall grass will be easier to check
using the method of the shadow projection discussed above.

INVESTIGATION TEST:

There are 2 kinds of investigations, social or technique. In the
Social you try to know and to understand the people and the
crazies living in an area. Their way of living, uses and customs
their traditions, hang up, fears and hopes, the history of their
land.

Why they do this or say that in general their behavior often
strange for Spock or Scottie, they are all crazies at times. The
technical one applies to a precise subject to get as much
information from all possible sources even darker ones behind the
scene and even the skeletons behind the walls.

Sherlock Holmes MUST NEVER assume anything. Check and double,
triple check Holmes Jr. Use your "IMAGES-IN-NATION" but coldly
isolate the evidences. Here are some suggestions for the social
investigation.

A)    HISTORY AND SITES:

1)   When was the village founded by whom (the People)
2)   Why did the village started there (flat tire?) (Fell in
     Love?) 

3)   Why have they chosen that name for  the place (The Pits?)
4)    What are the great events  of the village history? 
5)    Names of famous born or lived in persons (Joe Who?)

6)   Principal interesting sites (Dump! and Mayor's john, cat
     house?)
7)   Style of the Church and type of material and history.
8)   Are there any traditions or legends (Captain Brion, Crusoe?
     Tarzan & Jane)

B) COMMUNITY LIFE & ORGANIZATION:

1)   Which groups run the village (Mafia, Etc.)
2)   Who are the religious and civic authorities? 

3)   Are there any fire hall and police services at Donut shop .
4)   Are there regional and parish organizations.

5)   Means of transport (ass & feet) and communications (tamtam?)
6)   Type and frequency of popular feast (Saturday night fevers?)
7)    What people do for leisure & relax. (Get drunk..Stone?)

C)    GEOGRAPHY:

1)   General aspect of the region. #Accidents du terrain# 

2)   Type of farming and cattle raising, is the soil composition
     a reason for this particular choice.

3)   Will the crop be good or bad this year and why?
4)   Type & nature of surrounding woods, and their usages.
5)   Type of industries & pollution control if any.

D)    HABITANTS:

1)   What is the people main work occupation, winter and summer 
2)   Number of birth, death, marriage last year, specific reasons
3)   Are family big or small, old or young? 

4)   Immigrations & immigrations and why?
5)   Are folks influenced by town nearby and in what way  

6)   How are they coping with the rat race.
7)   Cost and level of life 
8)   Is the parish divided in clans and groups ethnic.
9)   Are people interested in bullshit or politics.

10)  What do they read, type of newspaper, bring copies local /
11)  Is there a particular trade, craftwork or art attraction /
12)  Is there a particular regional language?

13)  Particular dish or meal or drinks of the area.
14)  How are the folks dressed. (Funny? Weird, straight, Normal?)
15)  Are you in jail or out!

TECHNICAL INVESTIGATION:

Imagine you choose to study flood gates, canals.

1)What is their reasons  2) What type of material are they built
of. 3) How do they operate, high or low level of# denivellation#
/ 4) What is their dimensions and sizes and shapes / 5) Are they
open all year?

6)   How many ships cross it each year, their #tonnage#, size and
type of ships, cargo type and nationalities they use and their
crew / 7)Who can give you best information & why Colombo?

HOW TO DO YOUR INVESTIGATIONS: 

It requires 2 basic qualities: Observation and Tact.

Prepare your questions ahead by well observing first. Sometimes
asking direct questions on specific details turn people off so
start by making contact on more general issues or
characteristics.

Start talking about a subject which appears of interest or pride
to them. Discuss with many so as to get a complete picture and
don't forget to write it down. Don't rely on your memory, be
smart and write.

REPORT:

Using your notes and fresh memory? You write down the facts in 2
parts  a; report of your trip  b; report of your investigation.
Include in it the topo map enlarged along with any additional
modifications or instructions observed.

Then you add all the observations while traveling. EX: Wood and
forest, thickness, nature of plants and trees. Field and
prairies, surface, crop, appearance. Rivers and streams, width,
depth, direction, speed, bridges, canals etc.

Geology; type and nature of terrain, relief etc. Roads & trails
their type, conditions, state of repair & maintenance, towns
nearby. Towns crossed, importance, location, commerce,
industries. Persons met their general behavior & other
information on them.

OBSERVATION TEST for Scouts:

1)   Tracking scout in forest for 1/2 mile without being spotted.
2)   Facing 3 colored signals each meaning a move or action
accomplished instantly and correctly 8 of the 10 move needed.

3)   Kim test: give memory of 18 from 24 objects seen in 1
minute. / 4) Give detail plan of a new place, location seen for
15 minutes.

5)   Make a camouflage costume and approach a  first class scout
     without being spotted.

6)   Be a referee for a game in a satisfactory manner.
7)   Placing yourself at crossroad or street corner and spot all
     traffic violation committed in 1/2 hour.

8)   Follow a natural man or animal track for  1/2 mile. 9) Find
     the width of a river, & height of a building.

10)  Find the correct space between 10 different objects.

11)  Measure heights with a tick with less than 10% error .
12)  Give 9 Weather predictions using natural tell tale signs.

13)  Draw a path 1/2 mile in wood using conventional signs. 
14)   Find the weight of 10 usual objects with less 25% errors.

15)  Find capacity of 10 usual containers with less 25% errors.
16)  Learn to follow a track in all terrain and conditions.

17)  Go in a new room or place, stay 30 sec. then come out and
     describe all that you have seen in writing.

CAMPING TEST:

1)   Using a ground sheet only make 5 different shelters.
2)   Locate the best place for 10 different camp site and why? 

3)   Built 5 different shelters in 4 seasons.
4)   Light a fire using no paper & erase all traces.

5)   Light 10 fires using no matches.
6)   Cook 3 meals using no canteen.
7)   Find the material and built a fire at night.
 8)  Smoke 10 lbs of fish or meat.

9)   Make water safe to drink in 3 different ways. 
10)  Establish camp for 3 days in satisfactory manner.
11)  Find soft water and purify it in 5 different spots.

ORIENTATION TEST:

1)   Identify on land the maps signs and on the map the
particular points to come across, to avoid or to follow and why.

2)   Explain the difference between geographic and magnetic
     north. 
3)   Find the cardinal points on the map and on the land.
  
4)   Orient map using the compass.
5)   Orient map using the natural surrounding high light points.

6)   After having given your location on the map, give the
#azimuth# of an invisible object from your location, then go to
this goal and come back giving the proper #azimuth# 

7)   Trace a path of 2 miles on the map, follow it and come back
     using a different path from a third point (triangulation).

8)   Draw a sketch of a particular site seen while traveling.

SIGNALIZATION TEST:

Using Morse code send and receive using whistle or light or flag,
messages at 4 words per minute speed; 20 letters numbers or signs
with maximum error of 10%.

FIRST-AID TEST:

1)   Stop arterial blood flow at compression points.
2)   Stop arterial blood using a garrote. 
3)   To know how to diagnose and treat shock.

4)   Able to give artificial breathing mouth to mouth and CPR.
5)   Able to take your temperature and to know normal and danger.
6)   Take someone's pulse for 1 minute. 

7)   Give first aid in the following conditions: cut to hand-feet
     burn, blister, frostbite, indigestion, bee sting, fainting,
     sprain.

8)   Stop arm blood flow by compressing #humeral artery# with
     finger.

9)   Make sterile dressing and fix it with gauze on wounds to:
     head, elbow joint, knee cap, foot and hand.

10)  Put an arm in sling in case of wounds not fractures.
11)  Able to fix splint for leg or arm broken. 

12)  In group transport a scout on a stretcher, climbing up and
     down a stair or a hill, carry it for 1/2 mile in difficult
     terrain.

PIONEER TEST:

1)  To know and how to use knots: escape knot, fisherman knot,
weaver knot, anchoring knot using #demi clef#, + 3 other knots.

2)  Know how to sharpen knife and axe. / 3)  Able to put an edge#
     coin# to fix hammer or axe handle.

KIM'S GAME TEST:

This is an old game to develop your observation power;

Have someone to put on a tray or table or ground 20 or 30 objects
which is covered up, then he discovers these objects for your
display during 1 minute then it is covered up again.

It is now up to you to tell or to write all that you can
remember, then you do it for him while changing the objects. The
winner Remembers most of it all. For the gamblers you can bet
$1.00 per object forgotten  or remembered.

WATCHER TEST:

1)   Having proved his skill, visual accuracy, attention skills
     in the observation and tracking test.

2)   To spot blindfolded the approach of a scout walking
carefully in underbrush, show with his arm the direction of the
scout, at least 8 times correct out of 10.

3)   Able to establish between the map and terrain precise
     reports.

4)   Posted in high point of a new area, able to locate this
point orient the map accordingly and after a 60 min. exam to
designate the names of 5 close communities, woods, isolated farms
etc. (7/10)

5)   Using binoculars to approach A group of scouts on station,
to observe their attitudes, clothing, REMEMBER their talks, go
back without noise and make a full report.

6)   Keep absolutely still during 15-30 minutes facing another
watcher no indication of how much time spent or left to be told.

MONK TEST: TO DO THIS BOOK BY HAND! FORGET IT DICK!

