	ALKALINE RECHARGE


 From : Greg Hoole        9:2500/0        Fri 25 Feb 94 20:46 
 To   : Ted Thompson                                                            
 Subj : Buddy-l Alkaline Recharge                                               


The Eveready charger seems to only work with their own brand of "special"
alkalines, read "expensive".. I saw some posts here where people have said
that they have successfully recharged regular alkalines on them, but I
haven't seen it done.

Take a piece of tin foil and tightly wrap it around the positive end of
your standard Alkaline Battery.  Then insert it into the charger and
jiggle it until the red light, lights.  If you look at regular alkaline
batteries they have a plastic insulator around the outer edge of the
positive end.  The alkaline rechargables are metal and do not have the
insulator.  

The recharging unit has side contacts that contact the outer
edge of the rechargable batteries therefore recharging them.  I have had
very good success at recharging standard alkaline batteries but I did
have one that ruptured and did inturn leak.  So becareful!
                                Greg


Said Greg Hoole to Ted Thompson on the Lord's Day 25 Feb 94  20:46
 regarding Buddy-l Alkaline Recharge:

I have had very good success at recharging standard alkaline batteries
but I did have one that ruptured and did inturn leak.  So becareful!

hmnn.. so the Eveready "microprocessor controlled charge" is just a buncha
hokey that can be bypassed w/ tin foil?.. interesting..

As far as the Buddy-L, I have had good results from it, depending on the
condition of the battery being charged.. ie: it will charge a lightly
discharged battery to better than factory voltage (as much as 1.56v), but
if you recharge one that's nearly dead, it will bring it to 1.36v to 1.48v,
not quite factory voltage, but still better than Nicads or dry-cells...

I am sure that the micro-processor does what it says.  Its the batteries that
are a scam, its all in the design of the posative end of the battery.  I will
see if I can draw it here.

NORMAL BATTERY

            ___/----\___           l            l  <--plastic insulator
l            l     wraps up and around to
                              the top of the battery


Rayovac Rechargable Batter

           ___/----\___          l            l   The Rayovac has no plastic
insulator          l            l   around the top of the battery.  there fore
using the sides of the battery for the posotive connection of the charging
system.

All the Rayovac Batteries that I recharge give off the same smell (gas) when
being recharged as do the normal alkalines do that I recharge using the quote foil method.
                                Greg

Ted,
    I concur.  Actually, any battery can be recharged.  The trick is to
do it slowly.  Most types of batteries will heat up and be permanently
damaged if recharged too slowly.  The active chemicals in batteries must
be in a liquid, or semi-liquid state.  If a battery is allowed to dry
out it will not function.  Too high a rate of charge will also cause gas
to form at the center element (electrode) and increase the resistance in
the battery preventing it from charging until the gas dissipates.  

This can be readily be seen in an automotive battery.  Gas can form so
rapidly that the bubbles can be seen in the electrolyte and forming on
the plates.  When this happens water must be added to keep the battery
serviceable.

    The problem is how can you replace the water in a carbon-zinc or
alkaline battery.  Also, what is the service life of a recharged
battery?  In the case of a carbon-zinc battery the discharge rate of a
nearly dead battery is greater than the maximum charge rate.  The
battery will literally go dead while it is being recharged.

In a survival situation it may be worth the effort to try this.
Any battery is better than none at all. Jerry
