For those of you whom are new, every now and again we have an "I
Dare You/Challenge Project" with some kind of project that is
homesteading/farming/self-sufficient in topic. This time around it
is how to make a small windowsill hydroponics system. Past projects
(as well as this one) can be found in our FILES section located at
http://groups.yahoo.com/group/organichomesteadinggardening/files/
scroll down to "Challenges Dares and Projects" and open the file you
are interested in. Past projects have included things such as Cast
iron pans, Rug braiding, Candlemaking, Sourdough starter, Knitting
boot socks, Making paper, Milk Paint, Chicken tractors (where is
that file Dee?), Solar cooking, Soapmaking, Growing Sprouts, Cheese
and Yogurt making.
 
For those of you whom are new, every now and again we have an "I
Dare You/Challenge Project" with some kind of project that is
homesteading/farming/self-sufficient in topic. This time around it
is how to make a small windowsill hydroponics system. Past projects
(as well as this one) can be found in our FILES section located at
http://groups.yahoo.com/group/organichomesteadinggardening/files/
scroll down to "Challenges Dares and Projects" and open the file you
are interested in. Past projects have included things such as Cast
iron pans, Rug braiding, Candlemaking, Sourdough starter, Knitting
boot socks, Making paper, Milk Paint, Chicken tractors (where is
that file Dee?), Solar cooking, Soapmaking, Growing Sprouts, Cheese
and Yogurt making.

Hydroponics basically means working water ("hydro" means "water"
and "ponos" means "labor"). Hydroponics is not just a space age new
method of growing plants. Many different civilizations have utilized
hydroponic growing techniques throughout history. The hanging
gardens of Babylon, the floating gardens of the Aztecs of Mexico and
those of the Chinese are examples of 'Hydroponic' culture. Egyptian
hieroglyphic records dating back several hundred years B.C. describe
the growing of plants in water. Hydroponics is hardly a new method
of growing plants. In recent years, giant strides have been made
over the years in this innovative area of agriculture.

Throughout the last century, scientists and horticulturists
experimented with different methods of hydroponics. One of the
potential applications of hydroponics that drove research was for
growing fresh produce in nonarable areas of the world. It is a
simple fact that some people cannot grow in the soil in their area
(if there is even any soil at all). This application of hydroponics
was tested during World War II. Troops stationed on nonarable
islands in the Pacific were supplied with fresh produce grown in
locally established hydroponic systems. Later in the century,
hydroponics was integrated into the space program. As NASA
considered the practicalities of locating a society on another plant
or the Earth's moon, hydroponics easily fit into their
sustainability plans. Even in Antartica they have several
hydroponic gardens... there was a slight problem however...the salad
vegetables froze while being taken to the kitchen .

Anyone can build a simple, automated hydroponic system without
spending a lot of money. This system is compact enough to fit on a
kitchen windowsill--although it can easily be expanded to
accommodate any growing plant collection. All the materials that are
needed for this system can be found at discount superstores,
aquarium supply stores, or hardware stores for under $25
.Materials needed: Air pump, Timer, Plastic tubing, 2-liter bottle,
Straight through connectors, T connector, Bleed valve, Ice cube
holding bin, Medium, Waterproof glue or silicon caulk, Drill
Use a 2-liter bottle for the nutrient reservoir and an ice cube
holding bin for the plant trough. Once you comprehend the logistics,
feel free to experiment with other containers. To prepare your
nutrient reservoir, drill two holes in the cap of the 2-liter
bottle. The holes should be just big enough to snugly hold the 1/4-
inch straight through connectors. One hole will be for the water
line and the other will be for the air line. Drill a hole in the
side of the trough (the ice cube holding bin) as close to the bottom
as possible. If you plan on expanding your system, drill another
hole on the opposite side. Insert the straight through connectors in
the drilled holes. Create a quality seal around the connectors with
glue or silicon caulk. (it is NOT the one pictured today, it is a
smaller project mentioned here for the Challenge Project)

Create your water distribution hose by drilling several small holes
in a piece of irrigation tubing cut to fit the bottom of the trough.
Connect one end of the tube to one of the fittings on the inside of
the trough. The other end of the tube can be sealed with a dab of
glue or caulk. If you plan on expanding your system, don't seal the
other end. Instead, connect it to the other fitting on the opposite
side of the trough. Connect the water line from the nutrient
reservoir to the trough. Cut another piece of water line to about
the same length as your nutrient reservoir. Then connect this line
to the other side of the water line connector, on the inside of the
bottle cap. The line should hang down to the bottom of the 2-liter
bottle when the cap is on.

Run the air line from the air pump to the other straight through
connector on the cap of the bottle. At some point in the air line,
splice the line to put in the T connector. Off the T, connect the
aquarium air line bleed valve.

Fill your 2-liter bottle with water until it's about three-quarters
full. Reconnect it to your trough and place the trough where it will
be situated. Turn on the air pump and close the air valve. The water
will be pushed into the trough. Gradually ease open the valve until
the water is moving into the trough very slowly. It's okay if it
takes up to a half-hour for the air pump to push all the water out
of the bottle. The goal here is to have the valve closed enough to
allow adequate pressure to build inside the bottle to push the water
out, but open enough to allow air to escape when the pump is off, so
the water can flow back into the bottle.

Now you're ready to add the medium and plants. Expanded clay or lava
rock works well. Any number of plants will work in this system.
Succulent herbs, such as basil and mint, are particularly easy to
grow.

If you want to expand your system, simply build another trough and
attach the incoming water line of the new trough to the end of the
previous trough. Up to two modules of this size could be powered
from the same pump and nutrient bottle.

Flooding and draining the system once a day should be adequate. But
if you're growing a large plant in a sunny location, you may have to
set the system to flood and drain twice a day.

Is anyone running a hydroponic system currently? Let's hear about
it! What system do you run? What do you like about it? Want to
change about it? Do you buy or mix your own nutrients? What plants
(and is there varieties that do better than another?) are you
growing? Post some pictures in our photo album.....


tenzicut - who is building a larger version this winter, but might
do this windowsill one for the apartment

