Subject: Lightning Detectors
Sent: 26 Mar 02

The Zetas indicate there will be a lot of lighting after the PS.

It would be desirable to determining how close lightning is to our current 
location. If one has ham radio equipment, a lighting detector could give you the 
time needed to safely disconnect and ground the antennas (disconnecting power 
from the radios).   If out in the open on some hiking trip it could give you the 
opportunity to head for the lower ground or get out of the open area or even lay 
flat on the ground so as to not allow the body to become a lighting rod.   

If after the PS you get caught without a lightning detector then use a small 
battery operated AM radio.  Tune it to the lowest frequency on the dial.  
Lightning radio propagation amplitudes are higher at very low frequencies.  
Adjust the volume so that when a distinct noise crackle gets stronger you know 
it is approaching.  Eventually with experience one could calibrate the volume 
knob position with distance.  

The following is listed some of the low cost possibilities with respect to 
lightning detectors that can be purchased or constructed.  

--------------- 
NEW! StrikeAlert Personal Lightning Detector.  Finally, an affordable easy-to-
use personal lightning detector that provides an early warning of approaching 
lightning strikes from as far away as 40 miles. Perfect for all outdoor sporting 
events, work and recreation, or for professionals needing early warning Only 
$79.95!
http://www.weathershop.com/Lightning.htm
-------------- 
 
Affordable lightning detector provides early warning of approaching lightning 
strikes as far as 40 miles.  Low Power Consumption - Up to 100 hours of reliable 
operation with a single AA battery. Our Price: $74.95
http://www.andersengolf.com/strike1.htm
------------- 

HAND-HELD LIGHTNING DETECTOR
t will pick up electrical activity as far as 40 miles away and track the storm 
as it
Approaches ... giving you plenty of time to clear the field, leave the 
campground, or sail
back to shore. Be warned of a storms approach by an audible tone and by 4 LED's
ranged in miles, 0-3, 3-8, 8-20, 20-40. You can even select the range at which 
you wish
the alarm to sound.  Powered by two 9V batteries, not included, or optional AC 
adapter, or 12V cigarette lighter.   420 Lightning Detector  Price: $195.00*
http://www.scientificsales.com/conligh.htm
---------- 

Lightning Alert(r) LD-6500 Lightning Detector is only $ 140.00 + $
  8.00 s/h. Built-in alarm and light.
http://www.stormwise.com/index2.html
---------- 

Construct your own "Lightning Detector".  Here is a VLF receiver tuned to 300 
kHz designed to detect the crackle of approaching lightning. A bright lamp 
flashes in synchrony with the lightning bolts indicating the proximity and 
intensity of the storm.
http://www.techlib.com/electronics/lightning.html


